REDCap-ETL Configuration
========================

REDCap-ETL requires a configuration file. You can use the following example file as a starting point:

    config/config-example.ini

The 3 main things that need to be specified in the configuration file are:

1. The data source - the REDCap project from which the data is extracted
2. The transformation rules - rules that specify how the extracted data is transformed
3. The database - information specifying where the extracted and transformed data is loaded

REDCap-ETL configuration files can be formatted as ini files or a JSON (.json) files, but it
is expected that users will generally use the ini format, and the JSON format is not covered
in this document. Support for the JSON format was added for internal use by the
REDCap-ETL external module.


Data Source
-----------------------------------

The data source is the REDCap project that has the data to be extracted. It is specified as
the REDCap API token for the project and the REDCap API URL for the REDCap instance that
has the project, for example:

    redcap_api_url = http://redcap.someplace.edu/api/
    data_source_api_token = 1A2FC4E892CC712031BA94D1198127C1


Transformation Rules
---------------------------------------------------

The transformation rules specify how the records in REDCap should be transformed into records in your database. 

You need to set the **transform_rules_source** property to one of the numbers (1, 2, or 3), which are
described below:

1. __text__ - rules are entered directly in the configuration file.
    This option is only available for JSON (.json) configuration files,
    and not .ini configuration files. JSON configuration files are 
2. __file__ - the rules are stored in a file:
    * on the REDCap-ETL server, for file-based configuration
    * uploaded to the REDCap configuration project, for project-based configuration
3. __auto-generated__ - default rules (one table per form) are automatically
generated by REDCap-ETL. This option is mainly intended for testing that an installation
or project has been set up correctly.

For option 2 (the file option), you need to specify the file containing your transformation rules using the
**transform_rules_file** property. So, for example, you might have the following in your configuration file:

    transform_rules_source = 2
    transform_rules_file = basic-demography-rules.txt

Using option 3 (auto-generated) above will not allow you to modify the auto-generated rules.
To generate rules so that they can be modified, use the following script to generate a file of rules,
and then edit those rules as appropriate:

    bin/transformation_rules_generator.php

The script uses your REDCap-ETL configuration file to generate rules. 
For example, from the top-level directory of the installation, you
could use the following command to generate rules for a
config/test.ini configuration file:

    php bin/transformation_rules_generator.php config/test.ini > config/test-rules.txt

The above script supports the following 3 options:

1. **-c, --complete-fields** - includes form complete fields in the auto-generated transformation rules.
2. **-d, --dag-fields** - includes DAG (Data Access Group) fields in the auto-generated transformation rules.
3. **-f, --file-fields** - includes file fields in the auto-generated transformation rules. Note that if a file
    field is included in the rules, only a flag indicating that a document has been uploaded for this field
    will be exported from REDCap. The file contents will NOT be exported.

Examples:

    php bin/transformation_rules_generator.php -c -d -f config/test.ini > config/test-rules.txt
    php bin/transformation_rules_generator.php -cdf config/test.ini > config/test-rules.txt
    php bin/transformation_rules_generator.php --dag-fields config/test.ini > config/test-rules.txt
    php bin/transformation_rules_generator.php --dag-fields --file-fields config/test.ini > config/test-rules.txt

After creating the rules file with the script, you will need to modify your configuration file to use the
rules file, for example:

    transform_rules_source = 2
    transform_rules_file = test-rules.txt

Details about the transformation rules can be found here:
[Transformation Rules Guide](TransformationRulesGuide.md)



Database
-----------------------------------

In your configuration file, you need to set the property **db_connection** to a string that
provides connection information for your database, for example:

    db_connection = MySQL:127.10.10.1:etl_user:etl_password:etl_test_db

The database where the data is loaded is specified as a
database connection string. This string has the following format:

        <database-connection-type> : <database-connection-values>

Currently, the supported database connection types are

* **MySQL**
* **CSV** (comma-separated values)
* **PostgreSQL**
* **SQLite**
* **SQL Server**


### MySQL
For MySQL, the format of the database connection string is:

        MySQL:<host>:<username>:<password>:<database>[:<port>]

Example MySQL database connection strings:

        MySQL:localhost:etl_user:etl_password:etl_test_db

        MySQL:someplace.edu:admin:admin_password_123:etl_prod_db:3306

**Note:** Since the ':' character is used as a separator for the database
connection string, if any of the values
in your database connection contain a ':', it needs to be escaped with a backslash.
For example, if your password is "my:password", then it would need to be specified
as "my\\:password".


### CSV
For CSV, the database connection string format is:

        CSV:<output-directory>

For example:

        CSV:/home/redcap-etl/csv/project1

### PostgreSQL

For PostgreSQL, the database connection string format is:

    PostgreSQL:<host>:<username>:<password>:<database>[:<schema>[:<port>]]


### SQLite
For SQLite, the database connection string format is:

        SQLite:<database-file-path>

For example:

        SQLite:/home/redcap-etl/db/etl-data.db


### SQL Server
For SQL Server, the format of the database connection string is:

        SQLServer:<host>:<username>:<password>:<database>[:<port>]

Example SQL server database connection strings:

        SQLServer:localhost:some_user:amazingPW987:etl_test_db

        SQLServer:someplace.edu:admin:adminPassword123:etl_prod_db:1433

**Note:** Since the ':' character is used as a separator for the database connection string, if any of the values in your database connection contain a ':', it needs to be escaped with a backslash. For example, if your password is "my:password", then it would need to be specified
as "my\\:password".



REDCap-ETL Configuration Properties
--------------------------------------
This section provides a detailed list of the configuration properties.

### REDCap Connection Properties

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>redcap_api_url</td>
<td>The URL for your REDCap API. Typically this will be your REDCap URL
with "/api/" appended to the end.
Not ending the URL with a slash (/) may cause an error.</td> 
</tr>

<tr>
<td>ssl_verify</td>
<td>Indicates if SSL verification is used for the connection to REDCap.
This defaults to true. Setting it to false is insecure.</td> 
</tr>

<tr>
<td>ca_cert_file</td>
<td>Certificate authority certificate file. This can be used to support
SSL verification of the connection to REDCap if your system does not
provide support for it by default</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### REDCap Project Properties

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>data_source_api_token</td>
<td>The API token for the REDCap project from which the data
is being extracted from REDCap.</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### Database Properties

Properties for the database where the extracted data is loaded.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>db_connection</td>
<td>The database connection string for the database where the data
is loaded.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_ssl</td>
<td>
Flag that indicates if SSL should be used for database
connection (true by default). This property is not applicable to CSV files
or the SQLite database.
Note: on Linux systems when using MySQL, having this set to true
may cause the database connection to fail when the database host is specified
as "localhost". To fix this problem, set db_ssl to 'false' (or 0), or specify
"127.0.0.1" for the database host instead of "localhost".
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_ssl_verify</td>
<td>
Flag that indicates if the SSL certificate of the database server should be verified. For this to work, a valid ca_cert_file (certificate authority certificate file) needs to be specified. This property is not applicable to CSV files or SQLite databases.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_primary_keys</td>
<td>
Flag that indicates if primary key constraints should be created for
database tables (true by default).
This functionality is not available for CSV files or
SQLite databases.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_foreign_keys</td>
<td>
Flag that indicates if foreign key constraints should be created for
database tables that are specified as having parent tables in the
transformation rules (true by default). This functionality is not
available for CSV files or SQLite databases.
</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### Database Logging Properties

REDCap-ETL logs to the load database by default. It creates and logs to 2 tables:

1. **etl_log** - contains one row for each ETL process run, where each row contains
    the start time, table prefix used (if any), batch size, and REDCap-ETL
    version number. 
2. **etl_event_log** - contains the individual event messages for each
    ETL process run.

The 2 tables can be joined on their **log_id** attributes.

Unlike the other tables REDCap-ETL generates,
the database logging tables are not deleted between runs, so these tables
accumulate the results of all ETL runs.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>db_logging</td>
<td>A true/false property indicating if REDCap-ETL should log to the database.
The default value for this property is true. Database logging is not
supported for CSV (comma-separated value) file output.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_log_table</td>
<td>The name of the main database logging table.
This name defaults to **etl_log**.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>db_event_log_table</td>
<td>The name of the database logging event table.
This name defaults to **etl_event_log**.</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### E-mail Properties

Properties for e-mail error notifications and processing summaries
that can be sent by REDCap-ETL.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>email_errors</td>
<td>True/false value that indicates if an e-mail should be sent
when errors occur to the "email_to_list".
The default value is true.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>email_summary</td>
<td>True/false value that indicates if an e-mail summary of the
log messages should be sent to the "email_to_list".
The default value is false, and no summary will be sent
if the ETL process encounters an error.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>email_from_address</td>
<td>The from address for e-mail notifications sent by REDCap-ETL</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td>email_subject</td>
<td>The subject for e-mail notifications sent by REDCap-ETL</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>email_to_list</td>
<td>The to address list for e-mail notifications sent by REDCap-ETL</td>
</tr>


</tbody>
</table>

### SQL Processing Properties

REDCap-ETL supports properties that can be used to specify custom SQL processing.
You can specify SQL to be executed before and/or after the ETL process runs.

Note:

* If a table prefix is specified for the ETL process, that prefix
    will  NOT be automatically added to table names in the post-processing SQL file,
    so you will need to add it manually, and change it if the table prefix changes.
* This feature is intended for running commands
    that update the database, and select commands will generate no output.
* Custom SQL processing is not supported for CSV files.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>pre_processing_sql_file</td>
<td>File with SQL statements to execute on the database before the ETL process
runs. This can be useful for dropping indexes and views created using post-processing SQL.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>post_processing_sql_file</td>
<td>File with SQL statements to execute on the database after the ETL process
has finished. This can be used, for example, to create indexes or custom views on tables
generated by the ETL process.
</td>
</tr>


</tbody>
</table>

### Generated Fields Type Properties

REDCap-ETL generates several fields automatically. The generated field type properties
can be used to modify the types of these fields.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>generated_instance_type</td>
<td>The type used for the redcap_repeat_instance field that is generated by REDCap-ETL
when a REPEATING_INSTRUMENTS rows type is used for a table</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td>generated_key_type</td>
<td>The type used for the primary and foreign keys generated by REDCap-ETL</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td>generated_label_type</td>
<td>The type used for the label fields generated by REDCap-ETL
for the label views of tables</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>generated_name_type</td>
<td>The type used for name fields for events and instruments generated
by REDCap-ETL (the redcap_event_name and redcap_repeat_instrument
fields)</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>generated_record_id_type</td>
<td>The type used for the REDCap record ID fields
generated for each table by REDCap-ETL</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>generated_suffix_type</td>
<td>The type used for the suffix fields 
generated by REDCap-ETL when a suffixes rows type is specified</td>
</tr>


</tbody>
</table>


### Lookup Table Properties

REDCap-ETL uses a "Lookup" table internally to map REDCap's multiple choice
values to their corresponding labels. This internal table can be saved to your
database.

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>create_lookup_table</td>
<td>A true/false property that indicates whether or not a lookup table
should be created in the database.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>lookup_table_name</td>
<td>The name to use for the lookup table created in the database. The default table
name is "Lookup".</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### Other Properties

<table>
<thead>
<tr> <th>Property</th> <th>Description</th> </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

<tr>
<td>calc_field_ignore_pattern</td>
<td>A pattern represented as a PHP regular expression that will be used in
determining what calculation fields values are considered when
evaluating REDCap data rows for inclusion in a table. By default, if a calculation field
is included in a table, then any REDCap data records which have a non-blank value for
that calculation field will be included in the table. If, however, you specified the
pattern '/^0$/' for this property, then REDCap-ETL would ignore calculation fields that
are blank or zero when determining what REDCap data records should be
included in the table.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>ignore_empty_incomplete_forms</td>
<td>In certain situations, REDCap will set the form complete field for a form to 
the "incomplete" value for a record, even though the form has never been edited or saved
for that record.
When this happens, by default, REDCap-ETL will store a row for that form for the record
in the database.
The row will have no values except for the form complete field, which will be set to zero.
However, if this property is set to 1 or "true", then REDCap-ETL will ignore records for
such forms.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>extracted_record_count_check</td>
<td>A true/false property that indicates whether or not a check
should be done to make sure that the
number of records extracted from REDCap is the number expected. 
This is done to catch cases where REDCap's API does not export all the records
that it should due to an internal error, but does not notify REDCap-ETL of the error.
By default this check is turned on, but you might need to turn it off if
records could be deleted or added when the ETL process runs, which could
also cause the counts not to match.
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>log_file</td>
<td>File to use for logging</td>
</tr>



<tr>
<td>time_limit</td>
<td>
Maximum number of seconds the ETL process is allowed to run.
A value of zero (the default value) means there is no limit.
</td> 
</tr>

<tr>
<td>time_zone</td>
<td>
Timezone to use; see the URL below for valid values:
https://secure.php.net/manual/en/timezones.php
By default, the default PHP timezone on the system is used.
</td> 
</tr>


</tbody>
</table>
